The Return to the Homeland: Pilar’s Intercultural Hybridity in​ Dreaming in 
Cuban 
Alicia Collado 
ABSTRACT 
This work explores the acceptance of intercultural hybridity through the return
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the homeland as a fundamental step towards the reconstruction of identity in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
Pilar, one of the protagonists of ​Dreaming in Cuban (1992) by Cristina García.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
From a postcolonial perspective, the diverse means through which Pilar
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attempts to return to Cuba after decades of involuntary exile are analyzed and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed. Therefore, dreams, spirituality and the physical return to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographic space of the homeland are approached as attempts to reconnect to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the essence of her fragmented identity which, in Pilar’s case, was affected by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the disruptive power of her family’s exile. Finally, it is concluded that these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
diverse means to reconnect to her roots highlight her intercultural hybridity as a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
completely liberating and empowering component of her identity.  
Keywords​: Intercultural hybridity - identity - dreams - spirituality. 
RESUMEN 
El presente trabajo explora la aceptación de la hibridez intercultural a través del
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
retorno a la patria como paso fundamental para la reconstrucción de la identidad
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
en el personaje de Pilar en ​Soñar en cubano (1992) de Cristina García. Desde
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
una perspectiva poscolonial, se analizan y discuten las diferentes formas a través
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
de las cuales Pilar intenta regresar a Cuba luego de casi una vida de exilio
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involuntario. De esta manera, se abordan los sueños, la espiritualidad y el
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
regreso físico al espacio geográfico de la patria como intentos de reconectarse a
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
la esencia de su identidad fragmentada que, en el caso de Pilar, le fue arrebatada
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
a los dos años por la fuerza disruptiva del exilio de su familia. Se concluye,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
además, que estas diversas formas de reconectarse a sus raíces resaltan su
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
hibridez intercultural como un elemento completamente liberador y potenciador
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
de su identidad.  
Palabras clave​: hibridez intercultural - identidad - sueños - espiritualidad.  
Introduction 
“Don’t grieve.  
Anything you lose comes round in another form”  
(Rumi) 
Dreaming in Cuban (1992) by the Cuban-American author Cristina García
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
narrates the story of the Puente family and how three generations of this family are torn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
apart by the disruptive force of exile and their different views of the Cuban revolution.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 6 - Año 2016
Esta obra está bajo una Licencia Creative Commons Atribución – No Comercial – Sin Obra Derivada 4.0 Internacional.
In this way, Celia, who stays in Cuba and endorses the revolution, separates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographically and ideologically from her daughter Lourdes, who exiles to the United
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States with her family after being raped by revolutionary soldiers and after losing her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
property, confiscated in the name of the revolution. Consequently, Celia is also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
separated from her beloved granddaughter Pilar, with whom she keeps a bond beyond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the natural. It is Pilar, precisely, who is the focus of this work. Pilar becomes an exile
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involuntarily since she is only a child when her family leaves Cuba. As a result, she
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
constantly feels that history and the government have deprived her of Cuba and her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abuela, and as a consequence, both her Spanish, for which she feels pleasure, and her
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
memories fade away every day.  
Pilar embodies the 1.5ers, the generation of Cuban-Americans, who, in Perez
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Firmat’s words: 
were children at the time of migration, but grew into adults in the United States.
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
They feel fully comfortable in neither culture but are able to circulate effectively
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
in both. Unlike their parents, who will never be North Americans, they will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
never be Cubans. (qtd. in Payant 163)  
As a result of inhabiting in the limbo between Cuba and the United States, and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
belonging to neither of them, Pilar experiences an identity crisis, constantly trapped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between her roots and her present. In order to embrace the hybrid intercultural identity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that emerges out of the oscillation between her identity of destination and her identity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
origin, and come to terms with her separated beings, Pilar incessantly tries to return to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her roots, to the homeland, where she hopes she will feel at home again.  
In this context, this work explores from a postcolonial perspective the different
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
means through which Pilar returns and reconnects to the homeland. As the title of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
novel suggests, Pilar dreams in Cuban as a way to keep connected to her grandmother
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Cuba and besides, she attempts to connect to her homeland through spirituality.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These means represent the acceptance of her cultural hybridity and identity. But it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
only through the physical return to the geographic space of the homeland when she
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
finds the meaning of home.  
A Postcolonial View of Hybridity 
Hybridity is a central concept within postcolonial criticism given that it is
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
considered a “valuable as well as an inescapable and characteristic feature of all
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
post-colonial societies” and a source of their strength (Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin 30).
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hybridity
“replaces
a
temporal
linearity
with
a
spatial
plurality”
creating
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cross-cultural mosaic, and attempts to change a “destructive cultural encounter” to the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
“acceptance of difference on equal terms” (Harris qtd. in Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36). In other words, hybridity is associated to the idea of synthesis: the synthesis of past
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and present, old and new, motherland and host land, different languages and forms of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expression, a pastiche of memories.
The result is, as the above-mentioned authors
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
claim, a cross-cultural mosaic, a sort of cultural quilt that synthesizes and re-organizes
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the heterotopia ​ of the world meaningfully. 
1
1 ​Heterotopia is a term coined by the French Philosopher Michel Foucault (1967) to characterize the 20th
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Century as a “the epoch of space”, simultaneity, juxtaposition, “of the near and far, of the side-by-side, of
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Alicia Collado
In this context, Bhabha (1990) says that “all forms of culture are continually in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a process of hybridity” given that it represents “the third space which enables other
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positions to emerge” because it challenges the existing order and “sets up new structures
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of authority, new political initiatives giving rise to something different, something new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and unrecognizable, a new area of negotiation of meaning and representation” (211).
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By exploring this third space, Bhabha thinks, “we may elude the politics of polarity and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emerge as others of our selves” (1994, 38-39).  
García Canclini also develops on the notion of hybridity in his book ​Hybrid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cultures: Strategies for Entering and Leaving Modernity (2001) as a tentative answer to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
what he calls the uncertainty of the meaning and value assigned to modernity, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
derives, not only from the obvious differences in terms of nations, class, ethnicity, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mention some, but also from the socio-cultural hybrids in which the opposite categories
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
of the traditional and the modern mix. Hence, the difficulty in defining this concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
originates in the multiplication of hybrid phenomena during the 20th century and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variety and heterogeneity of processes and actors that it involves. García Canclini
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
defines hybridity applying Bhabha’s idea of hybridization process constantly in motion,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the “sociocultural processes in which discrete structures or practices, that existed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
separately, combine to generate new structures, objects and practices” (14).
In his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective, this fusion is not always planned; sometimes it is the result of touristic or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
migratory processes, processes of economic-communicational exchange, or the result of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual or collective creativity (García Canclini 16).  
In his work, García Canclini establishes a relation between hybridity and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
identity, and explains that it is not possible to talk about identities either in terms of a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
fixed set of features or essence of an ethnic group or nation. Instead, he proposes to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus on intercultural hybridity, identity sedimentations organized in historical groups
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are relatively stable (ethnic groups, nations, classes) are re-structured amid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interethnic, transclassist, and transnational bodies. The concept does not suggest an easy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and harmonious integration and fusion of cultures but ambivalence, contradiction,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
massification. In his words, the oscillation between the identity of origin and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identity of destination should take us to explore not only the “cohesion, the osmosis”,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but also the contradictions that emerge, and at the same time, the dialogical relationship
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
between them, allowing the immigrant to talk spontaneously from various places (20).  
Therefore, postcolonial identity becomes a dynamic, “constantly evolving
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
hybrid of native and colonial cultures” (Tyson 369). In relation to the social processes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of identity (re)construction and the acceptance of intercultural hybridity, Mato explores
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identity making in the age of globalization, defined as the worldwide tendency towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interconnection of people, their cultures and institutions resulting from different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social processes. Mato states that “identities are not legacies passively received but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representations socially produced”, and as a result, they are under social dispute (283).
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The author also builds up on the idea of an imagined transnational community, that is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mental representations elaborated by different types of public image-makers, varied
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the dispersed” (1). Foucault states that the world we inhabit is not a vacuum but an heterogenous space,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
where there is a web of relations of proximity between points and elements. He explains that in
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opposition to utopias, defined as sites with no real place, there are heterotopias, that is real places, other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
places or “counter-sites”which are are simultaneously represented, contested, and inverted, and at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same time absolutely different from all the sites that they reflect and speak about (3-4).  
3 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 6 - Año 2016
types of individuals and multiple social actors, which promote their production and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
circulation, idea which brings together different Latin American countries, constituting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a united race (282-283). 
However, Mato’s idea does not imply the homogenization of Latin American
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
societies and cultures. In his view, there is a tendency towards the homogenization of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Latinos, based on the idea of collective identity representation, the emphasis on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarities and the consequent eclipsing of differences. This disregarding of historical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contexts and histories obscures the processes of identity construction through the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over-simplification of each particular situation and the overseeing of elements like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ethnicity, race, gender, class, and cultural and historical background (283). Similarly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complex and problematic is the concept of nation, which tends to be used as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equivalent of the terms country and nation-state. This assumption carries out the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implication, similarly problematic, that nations are composed of homogeneous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
populations, equally represented by their governments, disregarding the ethnic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
component of nations. Thus, the representation of Latin American identity is understood
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in this study as representations of difference (283). 
Identities are then social constructs whose representations are constantly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(re)produced by individual and collective social actors who, at the same time, constitute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
and transform themselves. These actors participate in the processes of globalization and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identity-construction either consciously or unconsciously through the advancement and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transformation of their own representations. Identities are not socially isolated units and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all identities are constructed in transnational and internally connected social fields
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Mato 285). Consequently, the processes of identity (re)construction are perceived as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dynamic, evolving, relative, metamorphosing and socially interconnected, and as such,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intimately connected to intercultural hybridity. 
From Dreams to the Spiritual: Alternatives to Return Home 
The effects of exile on identity construction materialize in the nostalgia Pilar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feels about Cuba, since from time to time she feels the irrepressible desire to “hijack a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
plane to Havana” (García 137-138). Her memory of the last day on the island portrays
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exile as a dislocating and fragmenting violent force which separates her against her will
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from her beloved grandmother: 
I was sitting in my grandmother´s lap, playing with her drop pearl earrings,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when my mom told her that we were leaving the country. Abuela Celia called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her a traitor to the revolution. Mom tried to pull me away but I clung to Abuela
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
and screamed to the top of my lungs. (26) 
Pilar feels helpless about this and blames “the politicians and generals who force
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
events on us that structure our lives, that dictate the memories we’ll have when we’re
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
old” (138), demonstrating the futility of exile. The sensation that every day Cuba and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her grandmother fade a little more inside her, and that only in her imagination is where
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
their history will be preserved corresponds to the perception of exile as an imposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
restraint on one’s own memory, history and identity (Ricœur).  
4 
Alicia Collado
For Pilar, the limitations to return physically to the island, such as the isolation
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Cuba from the United States in terms of politics, economy and ideology, and her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mother’s rejection towards Cuba, impulse her to find alternative ways to return. On the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
one hand, Pilar travels to the island mentally, through the constant dreaming and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
telepathic conversations with her abuela that take place during the dreams. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dreams, where metaphysical, magic phenomena are intertwined with reality, are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instances of magic realism, and symbolize Pilar’s internal yearning to reconnect to her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
roots and the need to stay connected to her ​abuela, and her Cubanness. On the other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hand, Pilar travels to the island spiritually, through her approximation to the ​Santería, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
strong link to the cultural background of the island and a component of her hybrid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transcultural identity. 
Pilar, who belongs to the generation which tries to heal their wounds and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fragmented nature by remembering and by returning home to rediscover herself,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“shift[s] from a portrayal of memories in Cuba to a depiction of the alterations in
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
memory caused by the Cuban revolution and the Cuban diaspora” (Esplin 91). Pilar’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
memories of Cuba are influenced by her life in the United States and her family’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
memories. West suggests that in order to conquer the depression and fragmentation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exile, the subject should invent a “fictitious Cuba from the remnant and pieces of their
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
memories” (qtd. in Esplin 83). While Cuba and ​abuela Celia are gradually fading inside
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her, Pilar realizes it is only in her imagination where their history should exist. This last
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept, imagination, relates directly to the idea developed by Ricœur, who suggests
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that memory belongs to one region of imagination, the imagination of anterior reality. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
is her imagination, through dreaming, that prevents her fading memories from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disappearing. 
As the title of the novel suggests, Pilar dreams “in Cuban” (García 236), which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refers not only to the unique mental and sentimental bond between Pilar and Celia, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
bond beyond the natural, but also to the language of those dreams. This reference to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
language in which they communicate while dreaming, Spanish from the island or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Cuban”, symbolizes the particular linguistic-cultural code they share and by extension
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a third space, a sort of identity bubble where Pilar and Celia keep their bond protected
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from their surrounding opposing environments. Thus, the notion of Cuban as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
linguistic-cultural code also represents another cultural reality that they, Pilar and Celia,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have constructed in order to bridge the physical, ideological and political distances that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have separated them for decades. 
Night after night Pilar dreams about her grandma and Cuba, and in that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quasi-magical space they talk about mundane affairs, what they do and what goes on in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
their lives. In relation to this, Pilar says:  
I hear her speaking to me at night just before I fall asleep. She tells me stories
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
about her life and what the sea was like that day. She seems to know everything
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
that’s happened to me and tells me not to mind my mother too much. Abuela
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Celia says she wants to see me again. (García 29) 
Dreams, then, are one medium Pilar finds to be in contact with her grandmother
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Celia, and by extension, to Cuba. Furthermore, the fact that sometimes she dreams her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grandmother’s dreams represents a unique language, a bond between her and Celia that
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
goes beyond family lines, one in which communication occurs in the realm of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 6 - Año 2016
imagination and the unconscious, and not only through words but also through images.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this way, Pilar is able to travel across the Ocean every night and feel Cuba in her soul
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
again.  
The fact that Pilar attempts to reconnect to her roots through dreams highlights
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the yearning to rediscover her inner self and rebuild her hybrid intercultural identity, an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identity which she feels incomplete. She is two parts of a person, hyphenated, one in
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real life and one, happier, in her dreams. This last idea is illustrated when, after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dreaming in Cuban, Pilar reckons she used to “wake up feeling different, like something
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inside me is changing, something chemical and irreversible. There’s a magic here
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
working its way through my veins” (García 235). This image reveals, besides the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal yearning to reconcile with her past, a signal of her identity transformation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the intercultural, hybrid nature of her identity (re)construction process: the strong and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
almost supernatural bond she and Celia share, a bond that transcends the borders and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundaries imposed by men, nature and ideology.  
Besides representing the need to stay linked to Cuba, to her roots and to her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beloved grandmother, Pilar’s dreams suggest the relevance of the unconscious and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imagination. Dreaming, aided by the power of imagination, has contributed to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fictionalization of the island as a paradise-like place where the reconciliation, or
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
spiritual communion with herself and her past would finally materialize (Leonard 1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This act of imagination also works as an element that bridges cultures and trespasses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographic borders and boundaries; in this case, the political, ideological, cultural and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic differences that have kept Cuba isolated from the United States for decades.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dreams then become a mental third space that defies borders and boundaries, political
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences and governmental decisions.  
Feeling that both her dreams and her memories of Cuba and ​abuela Celia are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
erased by time and distance, Pilar finds in spirituality another vehicle to dig into her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
roots. In the novel, spirituality works not only as a means to reconnect to her past, her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motherland and her family back in Cuba but also as the inner force that finally drives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her to Cuba. Her connection with rituals and spirituality begins in Cuba when she is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
baby. Back then, she is called ​brujita, little witch. The nannies do not last more than a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
few weeks, and leave, arguing that the child is bewitched; one of them even says that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilar has made her hair fall (García 24). As a result of these events, which are not given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any empirical or logical explanation, Pilar is involved in cleansing rituals, and she is, for
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, bathed with chicken blood and covered with bay leaves. 
In New York, and after having lived in the United States for decades, Pilar is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
attracted towards a shop on Park Avenue full of dried snakeskins, wooden saints and
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
talismans. While she is examining some necklaces, the owner of the shop calls her a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
daughter of ​Changó, and urges her to finish what she has begun, words that illustrate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incompleteness in her life and also foreshadow her imminent return to the island. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to find answers, Pilar performs the ritual indicated by the owner of the shop,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baños, during nine days in an attempt to reconnect with the island. During her last ​baño,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
she experiences a sort of revelation and she knows what to do: she picks up her phone,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calls her mother and tells her that they are returning to Cuba together. Interestingly, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
decision to return to Cuba is triggered by a cultural, religious component that is part of
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
the identity of the island. In relation to this, Castillo explains that, traditionally, cults
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been designed by men of Western culture, and, consequently, women have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relegated to the task of preserving those cults, mainly through daily rituals and spiritual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Alicia Collado
cleansings. However, in an attempt to “return to long lost and non-Western ways in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
search of new direction for our lives”, these women have returned to the ways of their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ancestors (Castillo 145). Therefore, a woman’s self-acceptance and reconciliation with
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
her spirituality represent the maintenance of her well-being, since they help determine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what makes us feel whole, the sources of our strength, courage, and fulfillment as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human beings. In other words, the objective in understanding and affirming ourselves,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
integrating our fragmented identities, believing in the wisdom of ancient knowledge is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as Castillo says, “to bring the rest of humanity to the fold”, that is, to struggle with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need to understand who we are, believing in our worthiness, beauty and talents, “while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having to survive within the constructs of a world antithetical to our intuition and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge regarding life’s meaning” (149).  
One way of expressing this spirituality is through the roles of ​brujas “a spiritual
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
healer or psychic” and ​curanderas “a specialized healer, learned in the knowledge of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifically healing the body” (Castillo 156). ​Curanderismo involves the supernatural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
realm of our reality, that is, the conception that “the supernatural is a reality based on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the natural forces of the universe”, for instance, the belief that “persons can cause
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physical and emotional illnesses in others by use of personal power or with the help of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-corporeal beings” or the work with herbal and massage treatments (155). Both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
roles, which imply the representation of women endowed with a range of wisdom, are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
represented as a betrayal of the church, womanhood and the devout Catholic mother,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showing inclination towards the grandmother’s belief or the community elder. Women
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who feel identified with these roles of ​brujas and/or ​curanderas create some distance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the previous generation through the unlearning of those lessons felt as harmful to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
their well-being, a sort of deconstruction which allows them to re-capture their spiritual
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
orientation, and to adapt it to their particular needs. In Castillo’s view, this leads to the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(re)affirmation and resurrection of womanhood, a process of self-empowerment and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
self-healing (152).  
By healing, Castillo means “recovering from the devastating blows we receive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from society for having been born poor, non-white, and female in a hierarchical society”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(153). At this point, it is necessary to highlight that Castillo’s definition is used in this
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
work to refer to the particular case of the Puente family after immigrating into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States, where they are othered on the basis of their ethnicity, even when in Cuba
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
they are one of the most respected upper-class families on the island. One of the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dilemmas faced by Cuban exiles is related to ethnic and racial awareness, since upon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entering the United States, they discover that they are part of an ethnic group, Latinos or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanics, whose existence they did not know before arriving. Cuban exiles, as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other Latino immigrants, encounter a dichotomous racial classification system in which
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
whiteness and blackness are seen as a binary division, which is different from the racial
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
classification systems prevalent in Latin America and the Caribbean, where race is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organized along a continuum of categories denoting different degrees of racial mixture
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Itzigsohn and Dore-Cabral 226). This dissimilar environment increases the feelings of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dislocation, alienation and fragmentation in the immigrant subjects.  
One of the healing methods Castillo mentions is the ritual, that is, a form to calm
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
or reassure oneself when chaos seems at hand. These rituals are, for instance, ​aura
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sweeping, tarot card reading, the construction of altars, or “channel sessions”, the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material objects ​like candles incense and oils or ​baños (Castillo 153-160). These ​baños
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are precisely the ones that trigger Pilar’s determination to return to the island and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 6 - Año 2016
symbolize, in this way, a sort of spiritual call, coming from Cuba, asking her to come
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
back. This spiritual call also epitomizes the irrepressible connection she feels towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her home culture, her Cubanness, and the internal, though somehow unknown, need to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconcile with and negotiate between past and present, old and new, and her multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
selves.  
The Return: the Yearning for Finding Home 
The effects of exile on identity construction materialize in the nostalgia Pilar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feels about Cuba, since from time to time she feels the irrepressible desire to “hijack a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
plane to Havana” (137-138). This feeling of nostalgia increases the need to return to the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
geographical space of the homeland, the idea associated to the concepts of corporeal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
memory and the memory of places developed by Ricœur. Given that memory of places
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refers to the act of moving, travelling and having lived in a certain place, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
influence that geographic space has over what is remembered, the nostalgic Pilar returns
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to Cuba in an attempt to embrace her hybrid intercultural identity through direct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographic contact. She feels that the contact with the people, the smells and the images
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Cuban culture, her corporeal memory, will quasi-magically make her feel at home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
again.  
Nevertheless, her first attempt to return physically to Cuba is unsuccessful.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Driven by that fear of her memories vanishing, and the image of her father kissing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
woman so “huge and blond and puffy like a 1950s beauty queen” (García 25), Pilar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences an unsuccessful attempt to return to the island when she is a teenager. This
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
scene, her father kissing another woman, is truly disturbing for her, and she decides to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
go back to Cuba, take the money out of the bank and buy “a one-way bus ticket to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Miami” (26), from where she thinks she can make her way to Cuba, “maybe rent a boat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
or get a fisherman” to take her (26). However, once in Florida she is caught and taken
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
back to New York.  
From that moment to the moment ​when Pilar returns to the homeland, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overlapping of the time and space increases her sense of disturbance and disorientation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
She is, in Bhabha’s words (1994), here and there, back and forth. Pilar strolls between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what she feels as a place “relational, historical and concerned with identity” and a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
non-place, by definition the opposite, trying to achieve a balance between transit and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
residence, interchange and the crossroads, being a passenger or a traveler (Augé 1995).
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
In order to do that, she has to transgress borders and boundaries, fixed entities that are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physical, socio-cultural and psychological, barriers she was unable to overcome when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
she was a child and her attempt to run away to Cuba ended up in a fiasco. Geographic
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
space and the borders and boundaries that delimit the zone where the motherland begins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and where it ends also determine how we perceive ourselves. Pilar, for instance, thinks
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that returning to the island will determine who she is, as if the process of identity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(re)construction were a sort of magic moment, consisting in relocating herself into the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographic space of the motherland.  
Pilar then returns to the island with an imagined, idealized version of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motherland given that the mental representation she has about it is composed of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
childhood memories. Once back in Cuba, Pilar seems bewitched by the images she sees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around her in the streets, the women on ​Calle Madrid, the cars, and she feels they are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
back in time like living in a Cuban version of an earlier America. It is here when Pilar
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
8 
Alicia Collado
realizes the connection between identity, memory and the past: “we’re all tied to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
past like flukes” she thinks (García 220). Memory, consequently, becomes a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constitutive element in the processes of identity transformation and (re)construction and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the acceptance of her intercultural hybridity.  
She has, therefore, mentally constructed her own fictional representation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
homeland as a mystified entity: she does not feel at home in the United States, and feels
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
the irrepressible need to feel, taste, smell and experience Cuba again, with her body and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
soul, in order to feel at home and discover who she is. However, as García Canclini
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explains, the richness of the processes of hybridization lies ​in the intercultural nature of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
identities, given that the various identities coexisting within a person are constantly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
interacting and communicating in a dialogic state with the surrounding context, which
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transforms itself all the time, and with the past, which is recurrently revisited and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negotiated. García Canclini refers to intercultural identities rather than multicultural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identities because the latter does not imply the connection or fusion between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elements composing a certain culture and identity, whereas the former implies a state of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
dialogism and constant exchange between those elements and subjects. These processes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involve the elements that do not merge and those which are not negotiated as well. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilar, coming back to Cuba will not signify simply feeling Cuban again, as if she had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
never left. It will signify the reconciliation between her past and her present and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negotiation between the multiple identities that coexist inside her.  
Once in Cuba, the yearning of finding home materializes, but not as Pilar had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected. Instead of feeling she had truly found home in Cuba, she discovers that she
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
belongs somewhere else and, at that particular moment, she is able to embrace her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intercultural identity: “sooner or later I’d have to return to New York. I know now it’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
where I belong- not i​nstead of here, but ​more than here” (García 236). In Pilar’s view,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then, Cuba and the United States are no longer mutually exclusive binarisms, but rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complementary. As García Canclini points out, it is not in the osmosis and the cohesion
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
where the richness of intercultural identity is found, but in the creative aspect of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difference. Her identity is culturally in-between and therefore capable of moving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physically and psychically between the locations of Cuba and the United States,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traversing "the path from exile to ethnicity" (Álvarez-Borland qtd. in Machado Sáez
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130). This perspective evinces that Pilar successfully negotiates and re-appropriates her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
past and is able to synthesize the elements of both cultures that nourish her soul. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis, negotiation or creative (re)construction of her intercultural identity is not a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
rigid product, but the constant oscillation and movement between the multiplicities of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beings that compose her own self. 
Final thoughts 
“I wonder if I've been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got up this 
morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a little different. But if I'm not the same, the next 
question is 'Who in the world am I?' Ah, that's the great puzzle!” (Carroll 8). 
As Lewis Carroll’s words ​in ​Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland illustrate, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answer to the question ​who am I? (my emphasis) embodies one of the most challenging
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal dilemmas, given that identity not only depends on internal factors but also on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what the surrounding world says. This mirror effect, also called the looking-glass self,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 6 - Año 2016
in which the image reflected in the mirror illustrates society’s perception, exhibits that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the reflection is multi-dimensional (Tatum 18). In ​Dreaming in Cuban, the clash of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cultures creates in the female characters, and particularly in Pilar, a third element that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
results from the bridge between the identity of destination and that of origin, a hybrid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
intercultural identity. ​Given that identity is grounded in our roots and heritage, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
culture of our motherland, the language spoken there and the values and traditions work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the scaffolding we need to construct who we are. But identity also develops through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
our connections with the surrounding world, as a looking-glass self, that mirrors and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
reflects social expectations, rules, and values. 
Pilar is deeply affected by ​temporal and geographic distance, which exercise a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
powerful effect over memory and identity, and produce in her nostalgia, leading to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction of fictional representations of the island as a mystified entity, as a place of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
reconciliation and spiritual communion. Trying to reconnect to the motherland through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dreams and spirituality awakens in the protagonist the need to go back to the homeland,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be in contact with the people, the language and the places where she thinks she would
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
finally come to terms with her multiple selves.  
There, in the geographic space of the motherland, Pilar is able to negotiate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
tensions between her identities of origin and those of destination through an oscillation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between her multiple selves and finally realizes where ​home is: she belongs in New
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
York City, but not ​instead of Cuba, ​more than Cuba. This observation revisits and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dismantles
the
dichotomies
that
have
been
fragmenting
and
hyphenating
by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding them not as mutually exclusive but as complementary, in a dialogic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
relationship. García Canclini says that it is in the creative aspect of difference where the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
richness of intercultural identities lie and it is precisely in this negotiation where Pilar
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
materializes the acceptance of her intercultural hybridity. By embracing her intercultural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hybrid identity, Pilar has appropriated the margins and turned them into third spaces
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating a unique space from where the various and dynamic voices that constitute her
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cuban American identity converge.  
Works Cited 
Ashcroft Bill, Griffiths Gareth & Tiffin Helen. ​The Empire Writes Back. New York:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Routledge, 1989.  
Augé,
Mark.
1992.
​The
Non-places:
Introduction
to
an
Anthropology
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supermodernity.  London and New York: Verso, 1995.  
Bhabha, Homi. ​Nation and Narration. New York: Routledge, 1990.  
---.  ​The Location of Culture. New York: Routledge, 1994.  
Carroll, Lewis. 1895. ​Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. London: Running Press, 2004.  
Castillo, Ana. ​Massacre of the Dreamers: Essays on Xicanisma. New York: Plume,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2005.  
García Canclini, Néstor. ​Culturas híbridas: Estrategias para entrar y salir de la
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
modernidad. Buenos Aires: Paidós, 2001.  
García, Cristina. ​Dreaming in Cuban. New York: Ballantine Books, 1992.  
Esplin, Emron. “Cuban Types, Distorted Memories and a Return to Cuba”. ​Confluencia,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
20/2 (2005):83-97. 
10 
Alicia Collado
Foucault, Michel. “Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias”. 1967. ​Rethinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Architecture: A Reader in Cultural Theory. Edited by Neil Leach, Ed. NYC:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Routledge, 1997, 330-336.  
Itzigsohn, José & Dore-Cabral, Carlos. “Competing identities? Race, Ethnicity and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panethnicity among Dominicans in the United States”. ​Sociological Forum, 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2), (2000): 225-247. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/684815 
Leonard, Suzanne. “Dreaming as Cultural Work in ​Donald Duk and ​Dreaming in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cuban”. ​MELUS, 29/2 (2004):181-203.  
Machado Sáez, Elena. “The Global Baggage of Nostalgia in Cristina García’s ​Dreaming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Cuban”. ​MELUS, 30/4 (2005):129-147.  
Mato. Daniel. “On the Making of Transnational Identities in the Age of Globalization:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The US Latina/o- ‘Latin’ American case”. ​Identities: Race, Class, Gender and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nationality. L. Martín Alcoff & E. Mendieta, Eds. Oxford, England: Blackwell
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publishing, 2003, 281-294.  
Payant, Katherine. “From Alienation to Reconciliation in the Novels of Cristina
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
García”. ​MELUS, 26/3 (2001): 163-182.  
Ricœur, Paul. ​La memoria, la historia, el olvido. Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Económica, 2004.  
Tatum, Beverly. “The Complexity of Identity: Who am I?” ​Readings for Diversity and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Justice. Maurianne Adams Ed. New York: Routledge, 2001, 18-28.  
Tyson, Lois. ​Critical Theory Today: A User-friendly Guide. New York, NY: Routledge,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1999. 
11 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 6 - Año 2016
