Theorizing Women’s Transnational Literatures: Shaping New Female 
Identities in Europe through Writing and Translation   
Vita Fortunati   
ABSTRACT 
The first section of the paper aims at outlining the specificity of women’s critical 
contributions to transnational literatures and translation debates. Comparative Studies 
and Translation Studies are  undergoing a phase of methodological rethinking and of 
discussion on disciplinary borders. It is a moment of great change implicit in a new 
perspective that wants to take into account a ‘global’ vision on the state of art of these 
two research areas. This awareness is born from the idea that the canonical division 
between literary/cultural studies and translation is not acceptable anymore, because 
translation is nowadays an hermeneutical category important to understand the 
complexity of the world. A research area that seems to unite this new notion of 
comparatism and translation is that of “Transnational Literatures/Cultures”, where the 
term ‘trans’ outlines, not only the passage among cultures, literatures and languages, but 
also the overcoming of  national borders. The second section concentrates on Women 
scholars’ critical writing about “Transnational Feminisms” trying  to underline their 
main issues. The first one is to combine theoretical analysis with political praxis and 
teaching to establish theories and practices which refute prevalent power structures of 
patriarchy, empire and globalization. The second issue is to encourage a 
transdisciplinary methodology and the necessity to find innovative knowledge 
paradigms and a new terminology. The third issue is the need to highlight the problem 
of ethics and responsibility.  
Keywords: transnational literatures, transnational feminism, innovative paradigms, 
ethical issues   
RESUMEN 
La primera sección del artículo aspira a subrayar la especificidad de las contribuciones 
críticas de las mujeres a las literaturas transnacionales y a los debates sobre traducción. 
Los Estudios Comparados y los Estudios sobre Traducción están experimentando una 
fase de redefinición metodológica y de discusión a propósito de las fronteras 
disciplinares. Es un momento de gran cambio implícito en una nueva perspectiva que 
aspira a tener en cuenta una visión “global” sobre el estado del arte de estas dos áreas de 
investigación.  Esta concientización nace de la idea de que la división canónica entre 
estudios literarios/culturales y traducción ya no es más aceptable, porque la traducción 
es hoy una categoría hermenéutica importante para comprender la complejidad del 
mundo. Un área de investigación que pareciera unir esta nueva noción de comparatismo 
y de traducción es la de “Literaturas/Culturas Transnacionales”, donde el término 
“trans” destaca no solo el pasaje entre culturas, literaturas y lenguas, sino también la 
superación de las fronteras nacionales. La segunda sección está dedicada a la escritura 
crítica de Mujeres académicas sobre el “Feminismo transnacional” con el propósito de 
destacar las cuestiones más importantes. La primera es combinar el análisis teórico con 
la praxis y la enseñanza política para establecer teorías y prácticas que refuten las 
estructuras de poder predominantes: el patriarcado, el imperio y la globalización. La 
segunda cuestión es alentar una metodología transdisciplinaria y la necesidad de 
Esta obra está bajo una Licencia Creative Commons Atribución – No Comercial – Sin Obra Derivada 4.0 Internacional.
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 5 - Año 2014 
encontrar paradigmas de conocimiento innovadores y una nueva terminología. La 
tercera cuestión es la necesidad de resaltar el problema de la ética y de la 
responsabilidad. 
 
Palabras clave: literaturas transnacionales, feminismo transnacional, paradigmas 
innovadores, cuestiones éticas 
 
 
A Transnational Perspective in Literatures and Translation 
In the first section of my paper I would like to outline the specificity of women’s 
critical contributions to transnational literatures and translation debates. As I have 
already underlined in a European project and a recent critical overview1, Comparative 
Studies and Translation Studies are  undergoing a phase of methodological rethinking 
and of discussion on disciplinary borders. It is a moment of great change implicit in a 
new perspective that wants to take into account a ‘global’ vision on the state of art of 
these two research areas.  This awareness is born from the idea that the canonical 
division between literary/cultural studies and translation is not acceptable anymore, 
because translation is nowadays an hermeneutical category important to understand the 
complexity of the world. A research area that seems to unite this new notion of 
comparatism and translation is that of “Transnational Literatures/Cultures”, where the 
term ‘trans’ outlines, not only the passage among cultures, literatures and languages, but 
also the overcoming of  national borders. Sociologists have pointed out that nation-state 
category needs to be reconceptualised in the era of globalization.  According to William 
Robinson the “nation-state” must be seen as a “specific social relation inserted into 
larger structures that may take different, and historically determined, institutional 
forms” (565). In her book Sociology of Globalization (2007) the Dutch sociologist 
Saskia Sassen studies how global institutions, such as for instance, World Trade 
organization, intersect with the set of process that occur on the national and local level, 
in a way that the nation-state is modified. Sassen proposes an analysis through the 
theory of re-scaling: the globalization crosses the various institutions established by the 
different "nation-states". The various hierarchies do not disappear, but they intersect 
thanks to the presence of “new scales” which condition and change the old institutions 
(Benvenuti e Ceserani 70-74). 
The crisis of the concept of nation in Literary Studies has eroded the category of 
national literature while in Translation Studies it has enlarged the same meaning of 
translation. The new idea of translation permits to investigate complex problems which 
characterize the contemporary world such as migratory flows, the hybridization among 
cultures, and a new concept of identity and citizenship. This explains why this new area 
of research analyses not only migrations of writers within Europe but also from the rest 
of the world. From this perspective the term ‘transnational’ recuperates the possibility of 
exchanges with extra-European countries underlining people’s movements and writings 
about new configurations of geographical and cultural spaces. The transnational 
perspective permits to re-analyze the global cultural/literary scene not only from an 
economic or sociological perspective but also a literary and cultural one. On the one 
hand,  Transnational Studies have criticized the homogenization of cultures derived 
from the capitalist and neoliberal logics and, on the other, they have unveiled the 
complexity of migratory fluxes and how these have changed the idea of translation 
                                                 
1 
 Federici, Eleonora e Fortunati V. “Convergenze e Sinergie tra traduzione e studi comparati: una 
rassegna critica”. Transpotcross. “World Literature e Nuovi Media”,  anno 3,  no.1(2013):1-10. Print. 
Theorizing Women’s Transnational Literatures. Vita Fortunati 
itself. Furthermore, the “Transnational Turn” in Comparative Studies has provoked a 
critique to Eurocentrism from other perspectives which have enlarged and deepened the 
scope of Postcolonial Studies in the European context. 
 
Ethics and Politics in Women’s Transnational Literatures 
In this section I will analyze Women scholars’ critical writing about 
“Transnational Feminisms” trying  to underline their main issues. The first one is to 
combine theoretical analysis with political praxis and teaching, in fact as Silvia 
Schultermandl has stressed, “ in feminist politics, the ultimate goal is to establish 
theories and practices which refute prevalent power structures of patriarchy, empire and 
globalization” (“Transnational Sensibility” 721). They also have tried to unveil  the new 
power dynamics originated by global capitalism “which reposition women’s lives 
through migration, diaspora, transnational labour, and the resulting influence on 
identity, mobility, family and kinship ties” (267). For these reasons at the beginning of 
the new millennium Chandra Talpade Mohanty says: 
 
we—feminist scholars and teachers—must respond to the phenomenon of globalization 
as an urgent site for the recolonization of people, especially in the Two-Thirds World. 
Globalization colonizes women’s as well as men’s lives around the world … Activists and 
scholars must also identify and revision forms of collective resistance that women, 
especially, in their different communities enact in their everyday lives. It is their particular 
exploitation at this time, their potential epistemic privilege, as well as their particular 
form of solidarity that can be the basis for reimagining a liberatory politics for the start of 
this century. (236)  
 
In a seminal article Grewal and Kaplan (2000) drafted a sort of decalogue on the 
features of transnational feminism where they are lucidly aware that the relationship 
between gender and nationhood is so complex that we must avoid oversimplification 
and generalization:  
 
By paying attention to the interactions between women from different nations, we can 
understand the nature of what are being called “transnational” relations, i.e. relations 
across national boundaries. By such a transnational analysis, one can get a quite different 
picture of the relations of feminism to nationalism. This kind of analysis contradicts the 
popular belief that feminism exists in an antagonistic relations to nationalism. The 
complexity of nationalism is that although nationalism and feminism are often opposed, 
such oppositions cannot be seen simply as resistance to nationalism because often one 
cannot exist without the other and often one is constructed only through the other. (n.pag) 
 
The second issue is to encourage a transdisciplinary methodology and the 
necessity to find innovative knowledge paradigms and a new terminology. Women 
scholars are deeply aware that migratory flows, the new economic and financial 
situation have determined new issues of discussion after the Postcolonial Studies phase 
such as for instance the general applicability to and accountability of transnational 
feminist theory in relation to race-gender nexus and to the new European geopolitical 
situation. Furthermore, feminist scholars are deeply aware that one of the main danger 
of transnationalism is its monopolization along “a first/third axis” excluding entire 
groups of feminists in the so called countries in transition (Schultermandl 
“Transnational Sensibility in Feminist Theory and Practice” 274. See section 
“Transnational feminism and the Study of Eastern European Women” 275-277). 
The third issue is that we need to highlight the problem of ethics and 
responsibility. In the Introduction to the volume Minor Transnationalism Francoise 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 5 - Año 2014 
Linonnet and Shu-mei Shih underline that in order to study what has been defined as 
“minor transnationalism” it is necessary to abandon a vertical perspective where a group 
was hierarchically put in a higher position and to find a transversal perspective. We 
should not think any longer about binary oppositions such as centre versus periphery but 
we need to underline the relationships among minor transnationalisms. Today it is 
urgent to discuss the relationship among different ‘margins’, different ethnic 
communities:  “There is a clear lack of proliferation of relational discourses among 
different minority groups, a legacy from the colonial ideology of divide and conquer 
that has historically pitted different ethnic groups against each other. The minor appears 
always mediated by the major in both its social and its psychic means of identification” 
(2). In this perspective the “ transitional space”  becomes a fertile  ground open to new 
fruitful potentialities: “The transnational … can be conceived as a space of exchange 
and participation wherever processes of hybridization occur and where it is still possible 
for cultures to be produced and performed without the necessary mediation by the 
centre” (8). In order to describe the new planetary geography (Seyan 5) born by 
different communities, migratory flows and diasporas the two scholars retrieves the 
figure of rhizome which encourages the building up of lateral “networks” among 
minority groups. The new planetary geography is not build up on  hierarchy, on a 
vertical structure that implies the incorporation of a minor community into a major one 
in order to get citizenship or recognition. For historical reasons the politics of resistance 
prevailed over solidarity among ethnic communities and it has prevented a politics of  
“international minority alliances”. 
As regards literary and comparative studies this concept of “minority 
transnationalisms” has questioned not only the monolithic notion of “national literature” 
but has also provoked a rethinking of the  political meaning  of “minor literatures” and 
“minor languages”. Feminist scholars like Azade Seyan and Jasmina Lukic re-discuss 
the pioneering and stimulating idea of the two French philosophers Deleuze and 
Guattari that affirm:  
 
minor literature does not come from a minor language; it is rather that which a minority 
constructs within a major language. But the first characteristic of minor literature is  that 
in  it language is affected with a high coefficent of deterritorialization. ... Minor no longer 
designates specific literatures but revolutionary conditions for every literature within the 
heart of what is called great (or established) literature. (18-19) 
 
Jasmina Lukic finds the example of Kafka and that of the black American 
writers very useful in order to  describe the subversive use of language and the 
existential condition of contemporary migrant writers: “subversion occurs through 
appropriation of a language which is not one’s own. For Deleuze and Guattari , 
subversion comes from within the language and the way one uses it” (45). 
Women writers and scholars feel responsible for underlining the importance of 
transnational encounters  and dialogues among ethnic communities. It is not an easy 
task because in order to study minor transnational literatures/cultures we need a 
transdisciplinary methodology and be aware that transnationalism is not homogeneous 
but it is characterized by heterogeneity. Women scholars need to re-discuss the 
paradigms of Western culture and listen with humility to women who have had other 
experiences and lived different life-stories. This willingness is evident in Susan Stanford 
Friedman who hopes that women will find not only new transnational theories and 
methodologies but also open up their archives: “I ask that we widen the archive out of 
which we theorize about narrative, that is, move outside our comfort zones, engage with 
narratives and narrative theories from around the world” (24). 
Theorizing Women’s Transnational Literatures. Vita Fortunati 
The concept of solidarity  implies the deep awareness that there exist cultural 
differences, but  without any essentialist definition of them. As Koebena Mercer 
underlines: “Solidarity does not mean that everyone thinks the same way, it begins when 
people have the confidence to disagree over issues of fundamental importance precisely 
because they “care” about constructing common ground” (66). The construction of a 
common ground implies “a transnational sensibility” which presuppose a new 
philosophical mode of enquiry 
 
which begins by looking at life in and on borders, yet it goes beyond these inarguably 
contested subjects. It involves looking at the person who is looking, and can be fruitfully 
applied to hybridized subjects as well as to those whose identities are presumed to be 
fixed. As such, this transnational sensibility sees a lack of fixity as simultaneously 
inevitable and rich in possibility. A transnational sensibility is both a methodology and a 
mode of enquiry: a way of seeing and deliberately not knowing, a way of living within 
the spaces between questions and answers. (Stanford Friedman and Schultermandl 5) 
 
For this reason ethics in transnational relationships among women of different 
geographical and political contexts is very important. The relationship with the Other 
comes back, even in more complex terms, because migratory flows have stratified and 
complicated the concepts of ethnicity, race and citizenship: “the fluidity and complexity 
of our transnational moment, where migration, travel, and diaspora can no longer be 
clearly distinguished by intention and duration, nor by national citizenship and 
belongings” (Shu-mei Shih 5). From a methodological point of view what Francoise 
Lionnet and Shu-mei Shih tell about “the affect” resulting from the meeting with the 
other, is very important: “the prominence of affect as a subjective expression of desire, 
feeling, and emotions in discursive and political encoding of difference” (75). 
This has a direct effect on the relationship with the other 
 
The key to transnational communication is the ability and willingness to situate oneself in 
both ones’ position and the other’s position, whether on the plane of gender, historical 
context, or discursive paradigms. […] The challenge before us is how to imagine and 
construct a mode of transnational encounter that can be ethical in the Levinasian sense of 
non reductive consideration of the other, for which the responsibility of the self (be it 
Chinese or Western) towards the other determines the ethicality of the relationship. (Shu-
mei Shih 100) 
 
In discussing ethics’ centrality feminist critics refer to certain ideas and enter 
into a discussion with Levinas, the philosopher who have stressed the supremacy of 
ethics over philosophy. The concepts of responsibility, of justice and of proximity to the 
other are taken up by women critics who have underlined how, in dialoguing with 
women who belong to different political and historical contexts, the attention to the 
other is central, implying as it does a different way of being.  Being responsible means 
not only to be willing to answer the other, but also to answer for the other in a 
disinterested inter-relationship. Then talking to the other immediately becomes 
something more than simply talking, speaking to the other, it becomes seeing otherwise. 
As Levinas states in his illuminating pages on the iconicity of the face, the word and 
being aware of the other, speaking and the face are anchored to each other. Answering is 
becoming responsible, and becoming responsible is to respond. In this sense, and only 
in this sense speaking becomes dialogue.  
Women not only highlight the importance of being humble when approaching 
the other, but also the willingness they need to have in order to understand the other. 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 5 - Año 2014 
Women, that is, underline how fundamental the new way of relating to the other is, 
where feelings and the sphere of affection acquire great value. The thought of “how” to 
relate to the other compels ourselves to open up and thus forces constant and thorough 
reassessments. The thought of  “how” to relate obliges forgotten thoughts to be 
remembered, 
and 
encourages 
the 
emergence 
both 
of 
implications 
and 
misunderstandings embedded in daily thoughts and actions. In this perspective the 
thought of “how” does not mean only to know things  but to perceive and to feel them  
that is  to practice them with affections. Women critics underline that in the dialogue 
with women belonging to other cultures it is not sufficient to know them, but they 
emphasize the importance of a new ethics. This is  indeed an innovative aspect since by 
a new ethics thy mean not being focused on our self, but a willingness to listen to the 
other, not to impose our own  thought, but to understand it.  In fact the concept of 
proximity relies on feelings which are the fundamental ingredients in order to build up 
this new dialogue among different feminisms. 
If  in the past women critics in the dialogue with other feminisms used to stress 
the concept of  “situated knowledge”, nowadays there is an increased attention to ethics 
and to the sphere of affection. In this sense, the features of the production of feminist 
thought and its scholarship are re-visited, or better, are re-visioned: it is not enough to 
know or just  to read. But as Levinas underlines the true reading should always 
presuppose a new mode of being, no longer focussed on itself, but ready to open to the 
other, to the emergence of other thoughts, other voices, different from its own. Reading 
must in fact usher in the world of others into my own. Only thus can reading subvert 
from its very foundations the assumption  that the world is one and only thus reading 
will not limit itself to an exterior and functional relationship. Women scholars refer to 
Levinas’s thought because the other is never reduced to a mere object of knowledge and 
subjectivity is defined in terms of the heteronomy present in the other.  They underline 
and stress the importance of a dialogue that takes into consideration the history of 
colonization and imperialism and the political-social spaces where it takes place. Only 
in this way we can think about a transnational politics based on interaction, 
communication and representation. The importance on ethics of the behaviour we 
should assume towards the other can make women aware that one of the limits in this 
dialogue and exchange is to adopt “a monistic perspectival narrowness in scholarship” 
(Shu-mei 101). Women propose a  “transversal and trans positional  politics” where to 
be ethical is able to shift position to those of the other and many others beyond the 
binary logic of First World hegemony and Third World nationalism. This politics is 
sustained by the idea that the Third World should have a predominant role in the 
political, social and cultural transformation of the world. 
Many scholars have affirmed that after the dreadful tragedy of 9/11 a new phase 
was entered, in which, contrary to the tenets of postmodernism, a new narrative, marked 
by a sense of responsibility prevails. After 9/11 a certain kind of postmodernism with its 
jocular manner, its ostentatious irresponsibility, its deconstructive frenzy suddenly 
appeared frivolous against the enormity and terrible novelty of this tragedy (Ascari 5-
37; Burn). A “new era”  has emerged focused on the concept of responsibility. This is 
why  ‘a narrative of responsibility’ has emerged . With this term, as Maurizio Ascari 
affirms, we do not want to identify a  literary  genre but rather a trend whose specificity 
consists of its performative dimension. The relationship that this type of narrative  sets 
up between the author and the reader requires them to answer both cognitively and 
emotionally to the ethical and aesthetic complexity it lays down. These “narratives of 
responsibility” offer a significant reading model in the era of globalization because they 
explore conflicts and traumas. They underline the importance not just of literature, but 
Theorizing Women’s Transnational Literatures. Vita Fortunati 
also of language as a tool for understanding, an instrument of mutual understanding , 
atonement and reconciliation.  They also furnish the reader priceless psychological tools 
to relate to the other, suggesting we have to keep the boundaries of our ego permeable 
and flexible. Finally, they suggest each and every one of us must play an active role in 
the establishment of ethical values in our contemporary society. 
Another central concept in women’s criticism is that literature in a period where 
the logic of capitalism prevails can become the place where ethical values are produced. 
Literature against the logic of global financial capitalism and American pragmatism 
(Palumbo-Liu 41-73). From this perspective what Azade Seyhan, following the line of 
Appadurai (1996) affirms in her introduction to the volume Writing outside the Nation 
becomes central: that literature and imagination are fundamental tools to understand 
“displacement, disorientation and agency in the contemporary world” (7, 10). Writings 
by migrant women become testimony, because through autobiographical forms (life-
narratives) women talk about feelings, experiences in exile and new lives in another 
country.    
Women critics have thus spotlighted the important function of literature as a 
trigger to our imagination, opening us to alternative worldviews. “Narratives of 
responsibility” often take the form of  life-narratives,  of autobiographies, because these 
are a useful documentation to explain the complexity of our current situation, 
characterised not only by rapid evolution, but also by a new geographical configuration, 
where the European space is marked by a proliferation of micro-contact zones between 
intra and extra –European cultures that have been brought into contact by migration. 
These narratives recount the present by means of the memory because without memory 
there is neither identity not future.  This is true not only on the individual level, but also 
on the collective one, since controversial, divided memories—those of people who have 
experienced a conflict from opposite sides—risk replicating, if they have not been 
elaborated, the vicious circle of destruction. The importance  of “the narrative of 
responsibility” also foregrounds the important role played by emotions at the cognitive 
level and their impact at an ethical level.2 As Rosalia Baena underlines,  life writings 
follow a complex dynamic of cultural production: “where aesthetic concerns and the 
choice and manipulation of form serve as signifying aspects to experiences and 
subjectivities” (vii). Autobiographical writing are forms of identity construction and 
negotiate ‘transculturality’. 
 
Exiled in Language: Identity, Dislocation and Nostalgia in Ornela Vorpsi and Lilia 
Bicec  
The two case-studies chosen are Ornela Vorpsi and Lilia Bicec, two migrant 
writers who have left their countries, Albania and Moldova, which are geographically 
near Italy but quite unknown  for the Italian reader. They have migrated for different 
reasons, the first for the political  regime, the second for economic problems. Both have 
chosen to write their novels in Italian and are two emblematic examples of women’s 
transnational literature. In their novels transnational themes such as identity, dislocation 
and nostalgia acquire different nuances in relation with their cultural and historical 
background. Ornela Vorpsi  was born in Tirana in 1968 when the regime of  Enver 
                                                 
2 
Drawing on her own experience, Martha Nussbaum describes the death of her mother in a New York 
hospital, while she was lecturing in Dublin, This news caused Nussbaum a crushing grief and a deep 
sense of guilt due to her absence from her mother’s death bed. This autobiographical passage marks 
the beginning of the  reappraisal of emotions as a fundamental factor in our lives and as a guiding 
light that direct our ethical judgements. Nussbaum, M. The Upheavals of Thought: the Intelligence of 
Emotions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003). 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 5 - Año 2014 
Hoxha became more and more harsh. Ornela choosed to write her novels in Italian. She 
is a writer but also a photographer. She left Albania for political reasons and studied at 
the Academia  di Brera and later in Paris, where she lives now. Her writing can be 
defined as “a gift of migration”, the result of an inspiration strictly linked to it. Ornella 
Vorpsi can be considered an “ex-centric writer” in the etymological meaning of the 
adjective: being and feeling to be outside the consolidate norm that consider the Western 
world as the centre—both geographical and cultural—as regards the country of origin. 
Her ex-centricity is born from migration, from her continuous movement from one 
place to another  with  the consequent change of her point of view: “Travel makes 
people to hope that they will find in another country, another climate, and another 
language what they lack in the place where they are born.… Because freedom is always 
somewhere else. Until this place becomes your homeland. Then the travel towards the 
elsewhere that does not exist begins again”3 (Vorpsi 2007, 7-8). 
Migration implies a detachment from the country of origin and the search for a 
new personal balance between your motherland and your new identity that in many 
cases is forbidden since the people, the ‘true inhabitants’ of this place refuse to accept or 
give a possibility to migrants, ‘new people’ that remain in a kind of limbo. Ornella feels 
‘excentric’ in the Western world, in Rome, Milan or Paris, because she is considered 
‘different’, weird, someone to avoid but, because of her migrant condition, she feels ex-
centric also in the Eastern world. This paradoxical situation is the main theme of 
Vorpsi’s novel The Hand you Don’t Bite (2007) 4 that narrates a return, not in the 
motherland Albania, but to Sarajevo, in the Balkans, to the geographical area of 
belonging. Ornela Vorpsi feels this double ex-centricity because Albania is in a marginal 
position as regards both the Balkans and other European countries: “Albania on our 
shoulders is a burden, often we must explain things: which language do you speak in 
Albania? … What was the name of your dictator? I can’t remember the name!... 
Albanian are terrible! Really cruel people! They push their sisters on the streets!”5 (21). 
But Albanians are also considered as too much Westernised, sold to an external 
and foreign ideology:  
 
Now I have become a perfect foreigner. When we become foreigners, we look at the 
world in a different way from someone who is inside. … It is like going to a family 
dinner without participating in it; it is as if there is a cold window in between…. They 
peer at you, they recognize you, they make you signs so that you can get in and join them, 
you also see them and reply with the same gestures, but the dinner is over, it is consumed 
like that. After a while they do not invite you anymore.6 (Vorpsi 2007, 19) 
 
The detachment from the motherland permits to look from a critical perspective 
                                                 
3 
 “Il viaggio spinge le persone a sperare che in un altro paese, in un altro clima, in un’altra lingua 
troveranno quello che manca là dove sono.… Perché la libertà sta sempre dall’altra parte. Finché l’altra 
parte non diventa la tua dimora. Allora il viaggio verso l’altrove che non esiste ricomincia.” (La mano che 
non mordi 2007, 7-8) 
4 
La mano che non mordi 
5 
 “l’Albania sulle spalle non è un peso facile, spesso si devono spiegare un sacco di cose: ‘Che 
lingua si parla in Albania? …Come si chiamava il vostro dittatore, mi sfugge il nome! … Tremendi gli 
albanesi! Che popolo crudele! Hanno messo le loro sorelle sul marciapiede!’”. 
6 
 “Ormai sono una perfetta straniera. Quando si è così stranieri, si guarda il tutto in modo diverso 
da uno che fa parte del dentro. […] È come recarsi a una cena di famiglia e non poter partecipare ; si 
frappone una gelida finestra…: loro ti scrutano , ti riconoscono, ti fanno segni perché tu entri e li 
raggiunga, pure tu li vedi e rispondi con gli stessi gesti, ma la cena si consuma qui, si consuma così. Dopo 
poco tempo smettono di invitarti...” 
Theorizing Women’s Transnational Literatures. Vita Fortunati 
the country abandoned for political reasons. Through memories and a child/adolescent’s 
point of view Ornela Vorpsi remembers in The country where you never die (2005)7 the 
years of her childhood and adolescence in Albania, a sunny but also violent and hard to 
live country, dominated by dictatorship’s abuses of power. A machist Albania, obsessed 
by sex; to be a woman in a male chauvinist country relegates her to a marginal position; 
she is not a man and therefore possesses less rights to be free, to live free.  However, she 
finds herself in the same position also when she goes abroad and where there is the 
same repetitive stereotype, which has become almost a rule: the Albanian woman as a 
prostitute: “Mother Theresa, even if she was Albanian, could not save us, because 
Albanian prostitutes have been more than Saints”8 (2007, 67). 
In her narratives Vorpsi has underlined the necessity to put a distance (cultural 
but also geographical) in order to survive her past: “Because I don’t know if I make 
myself clear, but I survive only through distance … today (you know to live I need to 
put a distance)”9 (2007, 66). Vorpsi’s relationship with Albania is ambivalent, of both 
hate and love. Hate because for her Albania is a country of abuses, injustices and pain 
that she suffered as a child during her school-time under the dictatorship of Enver Hoxa, 
a country she left because she could not develop her artistic potentialities under a State 
art of propaganda. On the other hand, she feels a deep nostalgia for her country, its food, 
its drinks (raki, Albanian grappa, called salep), a nostalgia that comes upon her when 
she walks around the shops of rue du Faubourg Saint Denis:  
 
One day wandering through the little shops in Rue du Fabourg Saint Denis where among 
Polish, Jewish, Turkish and Indians breathing the air I looked for (and sometimes I found) 
the smell of Albania, I ran across salep which I had completely forgotten. I remembered 
with nostalgia and tenderness that the infusion of this powder had an exquisite smell, 
worthy of One and a Thousand Nights.10 (2007, 25) 
 
Her use of the technique of fragment highlights Vorpsi’ex-centricity. Her novels 
are fragments—almost photographs—(she is a photographer), moments of her life in a 
non-chronological order of her past, and her country. Since a general perspective from 
which the individual can look at things is difficult, the fragment is her privileged way to 
look at reality, but it is also a means to get a stereoscopic vision, which means to look at 
the same thing from different perspectives thus rendering a twisted and contorted but 
more complete vision. Her writings seem to be born form a ‘click’ of the past: they are 
constructed through visual memories. The narrating voice sees, before she understands 
what is happening or took already place. Vorpsi adds to this narrative technique the 
themes of the gothic fairy tale genre in a surreal and absurd atmosphere. In an interview 
Vorpsi affirms: “I recognize myself in a little process of wonder for the world. An 
amazement we feel in our childhood and that I still strongly feel”. 
The title of the first novel Il paese dove non si muore mai seems to refer to a 
fairy tale world, an absurd reality which shapes her characters. It is not magic realism, 
but a sense of wonder for an extraordinary reality outside of the ordinary, far from what 
                                                 
7 
 Il paese dove non si muore mai 
8 
 “Madre Teresa, pur essendo albanese, non ci ha potute salvare, perché le prostitute albanesi sono 
state molto più delle sante” 
9 
 “…perché non so se sono chiara , ma sopravvivo solo con e tramite la distanza…oggi(…sai, per 
vivere ho bisogno di distanza”  
10 
 “un giorno girando per i negozietti di rue du Fabourg Saint Denis, dove tra polacchi, ebrei, turchi e 
indiani cerco nell’aria (e a volte trovo) l’odore dell’Albania, mi sono imbattuta nel salep di cui avevo 
scordato l’esistenza. Con nostalgia e tenerezza mi sono ricordata che l’infusione di questa polvere 
aveva un delizioso profumo, degno delle Mille e una notte”. 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 5 - Año 2014 
the reader expects; it is a world where cities are made of smells and flavours and where 
the past comes back unexpectedly eating a particular food or looking at objects in 
drawers. It is an excessive reality (according to a connotation that the adjective ex-
centric can acquire): it is excessive for the migrant who looks for a reality made of 
evident things, because having lost her original country she looks for a new one; it is 
excessive because it is made of excessive characters that in order to survive must be 
excessive. A deep red seems to colour all her stories (in many cases we are told about 
little girls’ passage from childhood to puberty). This Albania is a black fairy tale where 
the wolf and Bluebeard have the faces of Albanian men hardened by life and where 
witches have the faces of cruel teachers.  
Ornela Vorpsi’s photographs are also ex-centric; they show women, often nudes, 
displaced from the centre, as if they want to escape. They are never shown frontally, 
their faces are not visible like in the covers of the two novels here analysed. They are 
always portrayed in anonymous places and seem to lean against something, a surface, in 
search for a contact, for stability, for a base, a point of reference, a place to take root. In 
an interview Vorspi affirmed: “My characters really love loneliness, they attract through 
loneliness in order to find a dialogue, girls are backwards so that the reader imagine to 
make them turn around, to go towards them and see their eyes” (interview in Ravenna). 
They seek a dialogue as her characters in the novels. 
The novel Miei cari Figli, Vi scrivo, (Dear children, I write to you) that Lilia 
Bicec published in Italian have the form of  letters that Lilia wrote  to her children but 
she never sent to them. Letters she writes  to try to find relief from the solitude she feels 
in Italy, without the children she had to leave behind. In these letters she describes  her 
difficult painful experiences in Italy, when she arrived  as an illegal immigrant. Her 
feeling alien in a country that at first is hostile, since she is there illegally, her difficulty 
in communicating with others because she cannot speak the language. Lilia is a woman 
that does not let herself be overwhelmed, because she has decided to build another life 
for herself and her children. This is why, once a job has been found, she starts studying 
again, teaches herself Italian, and above all, reads in her free time. She reads and writes 
to her children and tells them the story of their grandparents who endured the dreadful 
deportation to Siberia when the Russian ruled in Moldova. In these letters we are made 
acquainted with Moldova’s history, practically unknown to the Italian public, which is 
important to understand the current situation of this country. Lilia Bicec’s novel, Miei 
Cari Figli Vi scrivo,  is an example of writing as bearing witness which has had 
therapeutic value for the writer, enabling her to understand how, through her experience 
of migrating to Italy her identity has changed, has undergone a profound transformation 
process. Distance has enabled her to understand how her relationship with her husband 
was not funded on mutual esteem and how, in her case, hard work has meant the 
possibility of reconstructing herself. This reconstruction has undergone through pain 
and hard work: a year after their two sons have finally come to Italy, one of her sons 
was killed when a car ran over him. The pain was immense, but Lilia has survived, has 
found a new Italian companion, and now she is working in Brescia helping women 
immigrating from Moldova.  
At the beginning we mentioned these books’ importance from an ethical and 
political point of view. Ethical because these are books that show how the prejudices 
existing in Italy against migrant women arise from ignorance of their culture and their 
history, in these two cases, that of Albania and Moldova. This ignorance influences our 
attitude towards them, conditioning the dialogue we have with migrant women. In these 
two books the central issue is that of identity that is at least double, sometimes multiple, 
consequently it can be seen as a processual identity, passing through painful 
Theorizing Women’s Transnational Literatures. Vita Fortunati 
experiences, but which can be subversively remoulded in a strange twist, by writing in a 
language other than the mother tongue. So, the relationship between mother tongue and 
the so-called “step-mother language” reveals to be extremely fruitful since the “step-
mother changes” and is enriched with the echoes and interferences of the writers’ 
mother tongue.  
Cultural nomadism does not mean the cutting out of our roots of belonging, but 
rather the idea that by passing through more cultures, identity may be strengthened in 
order to access the critical capacity of building up a new future.  
 
Bibliografía  
Appadurai, A. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimension of Globalization. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1996. Print. 
Ascari, M. Literature of the global age. Jefferson, North Caroline and London: 
McFarland Company,  2011. Print. 
Baena, R. Transculturing Auto/Biography. Forms of Life Writing, New York and 
London, 2007. Print. 
Benvenuti G. e Ceserani, R. La letteratura nell’era globale. Bologna: il Mulino, 2012. 
Print. 
Bicec,L. Miei cari figli, vi scrivo. Torino: Einaudi, 2013. Print. 
Burn, S. Jonathan Franzen and the End of Postmodernism. London: Continuum, 2008. 
Print. 
Deleuze G. and Guattari, F.  Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1986. Print. 
Grewal, I. and Kaplan C.  “Postcolonial Studies and Transnational Feminist Practices” 
Jouvert  5, no.1. Web. <http:/English.chass.ncsu.edu./jouvert/v5i1/grewal.htm>. 
Levinas, E. Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority (1961). Translated by 
Alphonso Lingi Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1969. Print. 
Lionnet F. and Shu-mei S. “Introduction” to F. Lionnet and Shu-mei S., eds, Minor 
Transnationalism. Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2005. Print. 
Lukic, J. “The Transnational Turn, Comparative Literature and the Ethics of Solidarity: 
Engendering Transnational Literature” Between History and Personal Narrative. 
Eds. Maria-Sabina Draga Alexandru, Madalina Nicolaescu, Helen Smith. 
Contributions to Transnational Feminism series, vol. 4. Eds. E. Kenny and S. 
Schultermandl. Berlin: Lit Verlag, 2014. Print. 
Mercer, K. “Welcome to the Jungle: Identity and Diversity in Postmodern Politics” in 
Identity: Community, Culture, Difference. Ed. Rutheford, J. London: Lawrence 
and Wishart ,1990. Print. 
Mohanty, C. Talpade. Feminism Without Borders. Durham and London, 2003. 
Palumbo-Liu, David. “Rational and Irrational Choices: Form, Affect, and Ethics”. 
Minor Transnationalism. Eds. Francoise Lionnet and Shumei Shi. Durham: Duke 
University Press, 2005. Print. 41-72. 
Robinson, William I. “Beyond Nation-State Paradigms: Globalization, Sociology, and 
the Challenge of Transnational Studies” Sociological Forum 13.4 (1998). Print. 
Sassen, S. Sociology of Globalization. New York: W.W. Norton, 2007. Print. 
Seyan, A. Writing Outside the Nation. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001. 
Shu-mei S. “Toward an Ethics of Transnational Encounters, or “When” does a Chinese 
Woman Become a Feminist?”. Minor Transnationalism. Eds. Francoise Lionnet 
and Shumei Shi. Durham: Duke University Press, 2005. Print. 73-108. 
Schultermandl, S. “Transnational Sensibility in Feminist Theory and Practice”. 
Contributions to Transnational Feminism ed. by E. Kenny and S. Schultermandl. 
Revista de Culturas y Literaturas Comparadas. Volumen 5 - Año 2014 
Stanford Friedman, S. “Towards Transitional Turn in Narrative Theory: Literary 
Narratives, Travelling Tropes and the case of Virginia Woolf and the Tagore”. 
Narrative. 19 Jan 2011.  Print. 
Stanford Friedman S. and Schultermandl, S., eds. Contributions to Transnational 
Feminism series. 
Vorpsi, Ornella. La mano che non mordi. Torino: Einaudi, 2007. Print. 
–-. Il paese dove non si muore mai. Torino: Einaudi, 2005. Print. 
–-. Interview in Ravenna,  2-12 May 2007 
