chooling and Self-image in Chicano Autobiography^
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras
Facultad de Ciencias Humanas
Universidad Nacional de La Pampa
Argentina
Universidad de Wanwck, Coventri
Reino Unido
E,A,Basabe@wanMck,ac,uk
Resumen
El trabajo describe someramente las actltudes de Ernesto Galarza, Richard Rodriguez y
Glora Anzaldua para con los procesos de escolarizacibn segiin se deduce de sus obras
Barrio Boy. The Story of a Boy's Acculturation Hunger of Memory, The Education of
Richard Rodriguez An Autobiography y BorderlandsAa frontera. The New Mestiza,,
respectivamente. Muestra ademSs el modo en que dicho proceso ha afectado la
construccibn de sus respectivas im^genes autobiogrdticas. La escolarizacidn les ha
permitido acceder no s6lo a los discursos sociales sino tambi^n a la docencia
universitaria cuya ftjnci6n se basa en mantener o modificar dichos discursos. Puede
alegarse que la elecci6n de dicha profesi6n influye tambi^n en el uso de la autobiografia,
genero didcictico por excelencia, para hacer publicas sus distintas experiencias
educativas y sus propuestas de pedagogias fundadas en dichas trayectorias.
Palabras clave: Estudios etnicos - Autobiografia - Escolarizacidn
Keywords: Ethnic Studies - Autobiography - Schooling
Fecha de recepcl6n: 10-11-03 
Fecha de aceptacl6n: 28-11-03
Personal identity... is an achievement, never an inevitability.
Albert Stone 1981: The American Autobiography
A Collection of Critical Essays.
Anclajes VII, 7 (didembre 2003): 37-52, 
37
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
Education is the instrument whereby every individuai can gain access to
any kind of 
discourse.
Francisco Vazquez 1997: 'Chicanology: A Postmodern Analysis of
Meshicano Discourse'
Tender or harsh, highly romanticized or blurred amid the remembrances
of a past childhood, the institutional life provided by schooling stands as
one of the first principles upon which the structure of an identity is built. In
the borderline between an inner private conflict and an outer public
process, the educational experience also constitutes a tool to appropriate
socially valuable discourses and the power that they carry with them
(Vazquez 1992: 34),
Construed by narrative intentions generally seeking historical self-
ded as inventions and projections of identities. Thus, they are conceived
as not only pedagogical but also political personal narratives in which
lives, are, on the one hand, habitually retold as stories about educations
about society and, on the other, frequently "used to advance a critical
attitude towards social institutions" (Saldivar 1990:154), among them the
educational ones.
In this latter trend are particularly inscribed the autobiographies of
members of ethnic minorities whose schooling experiences have had a
strong impact on both their self-images and their public roles. These
subjectivities and these "objective" social positions in society condition, in
turn, the specific political and pedagogical stances their holders adopt and
the specific modes in which they choose to write their lives.
Along these lines, the well-known works of Ernesto Galarza, Richard
Rodriguez and Gloria Anzaldua can be described, Galarza's Barrio Boy
The Story of a Boy's Acculturation is the "true" story of a Mexican boy
who, with his family, made his journey from his mountain village in Mexico
38 
Anclajes VII. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52.
Schooling and Self-image in Chicano Autobiography
to the banio of Sacramento in the United States of America and the
relation of the impact that the contact with American life and education
has on "Little Ernie". Rodriguez's self-autonomous "Aria" and "The
Achievement of Desire" from Hunger of Memory. The Education of
Richard Rodriguez. An Autobiography retells, in a highly argumentative
style, the story of a "minority student' who "pays the cost" of his social
assimilation and his academic success with a painful sense of alienation
from his culture. Anzaldua's Borderiands/La frontera. The New Mestiza. is
also a journey but, in this case, not only personal but also historical and
mythic as it encompasses, in prose and poetry, its author's childhood
along the Texas-Mexico border, a sketch-like history of the migrations of
pre-Aztec Indians, mestizos, Spanish conquistadores and illegal
immigrants, and a description of the ancient gods and goddesses of these
people. Even though the generic type in which these three texts are truly
inscribed can be discussed almost ad-infinitum, just for the sake of this
work they are taken to be autobiographical.
The purpose of this paper is to briefly outline the attitude of the
above-mentioned authors towards schooling and to show the way in which
it has affected their different self-images. They have not only gained
access to social discourse through it but they have also chosen as their
profession one of the public roles that functions as a political means of
maintaining or of modifying this discourse. All of them have become
teachers, which, alternatively, influences their choice of one of the didactic
genres par excellence to make public the dissimilar educational
experiences they have undergone.^ Furthermore, it may be posited that it
Anclajes VII. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52. 
39
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
is the use of the autobiographical mode what enables them to propose
specific pedagogies founded on these distinct trajectories.
Basically modern apparatuses of moral and social regulation that are
continually created and recreated (Giroux 1997: 228), schools are the key
contexts in which the members of ethnic minorities are bound to forge
their self-images. These students, early imbued with the love of writing,
feel almost compelled to develop the need to learn, to meet the
educational standards required to dominate a common national culture, an
impressive desire which is shared by Galarza, Rodriguez and Anzaldiia in
their most tender childhood.
If not as overwhelming as in Hunger of Memory, the presence of
writing in Barrio Boy, at least, incessantly prevails in opposition to the
disability to carry out the literate act. Songs and tales about men and
women earning a living writing letters for people who don't know how (48,
88,109) and Galarza's amazement at his mother's and at his own ability
to write (117,159,234) engender a feeling of awe which is later translated
into the schooling situation. Little Ernie considers leaming "remarkable",
"surprising", "formidable" (94) and he wishes, he desires, he feels proud
about learning and about speaking English publicly (105,125,144).
Gradually, imperceptibly, Ernesto enrolls in a process not so
different—as Ramon and Jose David Saldivar (1990: 154-170, 1991:
125-153) want us to think—from that undergone by Richard Rodriguez.
He attends an elementary school with all-American teachers and all-
American heroes (200), a success-oriented school where "all instances of
learning are considered in the light of what you would be when you grew
up" (37), an educational institution where "no one was ever scolded or
40 
Anclajes VII. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52.
Schooling and Self-image In Chicano Autobiography
punished for speaking in his native tongue on the playground (Italics
mine). Nothing is said about speaking Spanish in the classroom and
where interrupting to tell teachers how some words were said in Spanish
simply 'didn't work'" (211). Successively, undiscernibly, Galarza's family
becomes much more alike to the Rodriguez than we generally believe.
"They celebrated success" (210) and they categorically become culturally
separated from their younger sibling. Even though the author posits that
"ours remains a Mexican family" (237), the statement slowly fades into a
wish in "La Leen-Con, as my lamily called it, became a benchmark in our
lives" (214, Italics mine). It is clearly his family, not him, for whom it is not
easy to reach the standard American pronunciation but it is also his family
who first values the social significance of schooling.
No wonder Richard Rodriguez also perceives that "it is education
that has altered my life" (5). He remains "eager", "fascinated", and
"enthralled" when he decides to idolize his grammar school teachers (41).
As his mother and Ernesto Galarza, he recognizes in schooling "the key to
job advancement" (53). Furthermore, at school he even "came to believe
what had been technically true since my birth: I was an American citizen"
(22), a student who fulfills "the achievement of desire" and for whom
education becomes a never-ending tirade of ambitions (44,130),
successes (45, 46, 51, 62) and benefits (49). His family, moreover, not
only accepts but also encourages "the dramatic Americanization of their
children" through his acquisition of what, for him, is "the public language of
los gringos": English (19).
Much less reluctant to accept these facts, Gloria Anzaldua also
passes her hours "studying, reading, painting, writing" (16) as well, and
/Anc/a/es VII. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52. 
41
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
she selects the fourth choice for women in her culture: "entering the world
by way of education and becoming self-autonomous persons" (17). She is
also taught "how to tame a wild tongue" (53-64) —^^'1 remember how the
white teachers used to punish us for being Mexican" (89)— and, through
her half-taming it, she obtains her master's degree (21). In this case, her
family, however, seems not to be alienated by her choice but they neither
encourage nor openly accept it. Deeply rooted in a working-class culture,
"a rural, peasant, isolated mexicanism" (21), they remain faithful to their
Chicano-Mexican culture and even Gloria herself usually abides to the use
of Chicano Spanish, her "illegitimate", her "bastard" language, even
though usually only as a literary strategy.3
Basically, none of the three writers rejects the "the Puritan ethic of
self-improvement above all else" (Macias 1969: 42). However, some
differences among their stances towards this attitude in relationship with
schools and schooling have to be stressed.
It is unmistakably true that Rodriguez, from a Mexican-American
middle-class perspective, gets directly involved "in a political service to the
right" (Saldivar 1990: 159). He is, above all, the one whose schooling
experience seems to be modeled after an objective merit system and a
logic of losses and gains whose only aim is to assign subjects their public
identities (19). His conclusive belief in the objectivity of the educational
system makes him energetically reject bilingual education and affirmative
action and, consequently, fall into what McLaren (1994: 29) calls "dead
pluralism", an ideological stance by which the fact that difference is a
social construct forged amid asymmetrical power relationships is
systematically denied.
42 
Ancliges VII. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52.
Schooling and Self-image in Chicano Autobiography
Even though Galarza also sometimes adheres, through his "hacerle
la lucha" (134), to the individualistic logic of Clint Eastwoodian cliches,
popularized mottoes which reproduce national images of citizenship, he
undeniably recovers the banio as "the root and regenerative source of
Chicano communal consciousness" (Jimenez 1974:14). "The barrio was
providing me with an education out of school as well as in" (224). From
this manifold place, a huge amount of social roles and practices alien to
the educational system springs up and is revealed to Little Ernie in order
to help him build his sense of identity, politics and culture. The site of
socially legitimized learning is displaced towards an ongoing, never-
ending mass of informal communal knowledge that the boy continually
appropriates, good manners (45-47), the cooking lessons of his mother
(33-37) and the history and traditions of Mexico (4245), which lets him
fashion himself as a cooker, an Administrador, a varillero, a Mexican
gentleman.
"If Richard Rodriguez is completely mortgaged to an ideology that
privileges the category of 'individual', Gloria Anzaldua is on the other end
of the pole: she is the champion of communitarian thinking.' (Alire Saez
1997: 84). Her thoughts, nevertheless, do not aim at recovering barrio
consciousness but at recreating the history of the colonization and
oppression of the indigenous people from the Americas both by Spanish
and Anglo-American imperialists. As a consequence and in a move
radically different from those of both Galarza and Rodriguez, she tries to
rescue neither her Mexican-ness nor her American-ness but her "Chicana
positionality on the border' (Saldivar-Hull 2000: 71. Italics mine). From the
site of the atravesados (19), she raises the issue of resistance not only
Anc/a/es Vii. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52. 
43
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
against the educational system, whose reglas de academia she interprets
as linguistic terrorism (53-64) but also against a generalized intolerant
attitude towards the "other", "the Chicano, indio, American Indian, mojado,
mexicano, immigrant Latino, Anglo in power, working-class Anglo, Black,
Asian" (87),
All in all, it seems to be social status and class consciousness, both
somehow construed by their institutional experiences at school, what
primarily influences Rodriguez's, Galarza's and Anzaldiia's self-images. The
eariy social integration of Galarza as a voluntary translator, the oyerwhelming
pressure for success in Rodriguez and the strong political commitment of
Anzaldua in defense of her sexual behayior positively proves that the context
of our identities does not determine the way in which they are represented,
but it plays a vital role in their rhetorical inscriptions (McLaren 1994:59),
As it has already been stated, Rodriguez never denies his being 'an
assimilated middle-class American' who celebrates the day he acquires his
new name: Rich-heard Road-ree-guess (3, 27, 4), Galarza and Anzaldua,
nevertheless, enter into more complex, more conflictive relationships with
their social self-images. The fomier acknowledges, first, that there is "a rumor
that Mexicans „, have lost their 'self-images'" and then, he conclusively
denies it: "I, for one Mexican, never had any doubts on this score," (2), Later,
however, he tries to exclude himself from the Mexican group. He refers to
them as "the people", "the jalcocotecano" (50), "the chicanos" (50-207),
Particularly interesting is the case of a paragraph beginning "Once we had
wori<", whose concluding sentence starts "Barrio people, when they first
came to town" (203, Italics mine,), which clearly shows his precarious
wandering between both worlds, the Mexican and the American, Anzaldua
44 
Anclajes VII, 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52,
Schooling and Self-infiage in Chicano Autobiography
bounds together the Chicano population by its shared history of struggle,
suffering and oppression, which she equates with the conditions of the
laboring underclass. She, however, cieariy states that she has only got
wori<ing-class origins and that now she is a university teacher with a mission
to carry out: teaching the history of her community (20-21,87),
However rooted on either the Mexican or Chicano traditions as they
are, the three authors found their self-images on an American consciousness
modeled by the schooling experience, an event in which writing and the
Puritan logic of self-improvement are praised above all. This lets them gain
access to social discourse and become part of the institutions that have
traditionally fixed "the procedures of control of Meshicano discourse"
(Vazquez 1992:28),
"I have taken Caliban's advice, I have stolen their books, I will have
some run of this isle," (Rodriguez 1982:3), Mastering the English language,
however, has not been the only priority in the life of these authors. They also
seem to have taken over the role of the alienated Ariel and one of them
complied with Prospero's thoughts. Education has altered their lives and,
through it, they have reached "the institutional sites that lend legitimacy to
their statements" (Vazquez 1992: 31): "I wanted to be like my teachers,,,,,
even to assume a teacher's persona" states Rodriguez (55) while Galarza
confesses that, among his family, his "thumbnail sketches became best-
sellers" (4) and Anzaldua profusely describes her own writing strategies, the
making of her book and her position in the American academy (65-75),
Academics, writers, intellectuals, they all assume the narrative authority
of their own lives whose experiences they take the decision of making public
through their writing. Now they have their own books: their respective.
Anclajes VII, 7 {diciembre 2003): 37-52. 
45
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
autobiographies. Their choice of this specific genre, a naive act at first sight,
becomes, in tum, a strong not only pedagogical but also political move.
Relying on the normative and pedagogical character of the autobiography
(Bajtin, 1989:289) and on the powerful double articulation of their selves as
both writers and teachers, ethnographers and native informants, they choose
to produce didactic manifestoes, an "equation to autobiography used by
Stone (1981: 2), in order to propose specific pedagogies founded on their
different trajectories in a similar environment, the United States of America,
The three authors have leamt how to be Americans, Mexican-
Americans or Chicanos in the land of opportunity and they want to teach it.
They take the decision of making the road to self-achievement public, the
goals, the ends and the means of each showing, however, the differences
among them in the articulation of both their self-images and their pedagogical
projects,
A first basic distinction has to be drawn between Rodriguez, on the one
hand, and Anzaldua and Galarza, on the other. The fomier, as it has already
been stated, seems to be guided by the ethics of material gains and
academic success, his conscious search for acculturation and his explicit
commitment to the American cause, sharply opposing him to the latter's
proposals. These include "a self-awareness or self-respect and a personal
commitment" to both the Chicano and the American communities (Macias
1969: 41, Galarza 183-197, Anzaldua 87), whose tenets, even though
sometimes rejected, are recognized as part of the whole lot of either inherited
or acquired communal values. Both Anzaldua and Galarza, for example,
denounce the patriarchal aspect of Mexican-ness, but this does not lead
them to an absolute rejection of the Mexican culture altogether but to the
46 
Anclajes VII, 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52,
Schooling and Self-image in Chicano Autobiography
voicing of the necessity of looking for new pattems within the community
(Anzaldua 16-18),
The difference in attitude towards the communal places they are
involved in posits another, a second, line to be drawn among these authors.
The three of them conceive the places from where to build their national,
cultural and moral identities differently. Whereas Rodriguez sees himself as
completely assimilated to the American urban landscape —overhearing two
English speakers at a South American airport, he would say "I will hear it
[English] with pleasure, for it is now the sound of my society," (14)—,
Anzaldua and Galarza choose to construe their public identities giving an
utmost prominence to their paradigmatic geopolitical location, the very titles
of their autobiographies —Bordertands/La frontera and Banio Boy— being
the most salient proof of this point.
Nevertheless, it is in their specific educational programs founded on
their distinct trajectories, where the main contrast among Rodriguez, Galarza
and Anzaldua lies.
On the basis of a strong pamphlet against both bilingual education and
affirmative action, Rodriguez's proposal, heavily grounded on his own
experience and on Richard Hoggarts The Uses of Literacy (1957), aims at
the standardization of American values through and all-American education.
To be successful, he posits, a public language has to be learnt and, through
it, a public identity has to be acquired and this should be the sole purpose of
the education of a Mexican-American in the United States (Alire Saez 1997:
77),^ This stance implies that "education" and "society" stand against each
other undiailecticaily with education standing as the valuative temi (Saldivar
Anclajes VII, 7 (didembre 2003): 37-52, 
47
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
1990: 169), which makes him fall into the American middle-class myth of
individuality and, moreover, makes him derive from his experience "that
Mexican-Americans must either 'assimilate' completely or remain 'alien',
poweriess and silent on the fringes of the United States society" (Staten
1998:104),
While Rodriguez labels his experience assimilation and he uncritically
clings to it, Galarza calls his acculturation and he defines it as the double
prxess of becoming both urban and American (207-211) but, at the same
time, remaining faithful to his Mexican tradition, Galarza proposes as a truly
valid pedagogy what has been generally called the "societal curriculum", all
"the socializing factors [out of school] which 'educate' us throughout our
entire lives" (Cortez quoted by Vazquez 1992:19),
Even though his move towards a communal-based form of education
positions Galarza as an organic intellectual involved in the political work of
social change, it seems, however, somehow hyperbolic to say that his
political consciousness is "an ideology of cultural resistance to power of every
kind" (Saldivar 1991:140), Even though the American school does not allow
his Mexican culture enter the classroom, as it has already been shown, he
never resists to it. On the contrary, the educational institution and the school
curriculum become, as the last lines of the book implicitly states, the centre
and the core of his life as an adolescent. He says, "I unhooked the bicycle,
mounted it and headed for the main high school,,, I wondered about the
debating team and the other things Mrs, Everett had mentioned" (266),
Nevertheless, both Galarza and Anzaldua offer their views on
education as modifications of social discourse, which Rodriguez does not.
They never aim at the infinite maintenance of the status quo as the latter
48 
Anctajes VII, 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52,
Schooling and Self-image in Chicano Autobiography
does. Thus, their autobiographies can be read as political projects on the
grounds of which social change may be not only desirable but also possible.
Through a move that constitutes one of the strongest blows that a
pedagogical discourse aiming at ideological and cultural homogenization
—like Rodriguez's— can receive, Anzaldua goes a step further than
Galarza and in the last chapter of her book "La conciencia de la
mesfea/Towards a New Consciousness" (77-91) she proposes the possibility
of an education working for the formation of subjects who are the products of
a cultural crossroads (McLaren 1994: 12), Even quoted by reputed
educational researchers (Giroux 1997: 282), her project, strongly grounded
on a tolerance for ambiguity (79-80), tries to gather all the people of the globe
under a new cosmic race, "la primera raza sintesis del globo, a fifth race
embracing the four major races of the world" (77), She firmly decrees the
need for everybody to appropriate the nan-ative authority of his or her own life
and her own will to assume it without begging entrance to the Anglo (IV),
From a collective subject position, she summons the worid to
hallar los caminos para incidir en las fbrmaciones culturales y politicas, de
modo tal que podamos prestar atencion a la diferencia a ia vez que
compartimos un "ethos comun" de soldaridad, lucha y liberacion (Giroux
1994:94)
a call and a path we all, as teachers and students, would like to share,
Notas
' The first version of this paper was written as part of the Seminar Uteratura
Mnica de ios Estados Unidos taught by Dr, David William Foster at the Escuela de
Post-Graduaci6n, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Universidad Nacional de Rio
Cuarto in August 2000 and read at the Decimoquintas Jomadas de Investigacion de la
Anclajes VII, 7 (didembre 2003): 37-52, 
49
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
Facultad de Ciencias Humanas at the Universidad Nacional de La Pampa in General Pico
on November 7'^ 8»' and 9'^ 2001,
2 Ernesto Galarza attended Columbia University where he received a Ph,D in
History and Political Science, He became a teacher at the University of Southern
California, and made his name as a poet and prose writer, Galarza served as a
member of the US House of Representatives Committee on Education and Labor, and
as a consultant to the National Farmers Union, Richard Rodriguez earned degrees in
English at Standford and in Philosophy at Columbia University and he pursued his
doctorate in Renaissance Uterature at Berkely, He taught at Berkely as a graduate
student for about two years, Gloria Anzaldua received her B,A, in English, Art, and
Secondary Education from Pan American University, She then earned an M,A, in
English and Education from the University of Texas, As a teacher, Anzaldua has
instructed a wide variety of students. She first taught in a bilingual preschool program
and in a special education program for mentally and emotionally handicapped
students. Later she worked in college classrooms to teach Feminism, Chicano Studies,
and Creative Writing at a number of Universities including the University of Texas at
Austin, Vennont College of Norwich University, and San Francisco State University,
^ I have already tackeld Gloria Anzaldua's particular use of Spanish in "La
lengua de la frontera: fracturas y reconciliaciones en Atre^/esando fronteras/Crossing
Borders de Gloria Anzaldua" Las relaciones intercultureies entre Estados Unidos y
Latinoamerica. It Jomadas de Estudios Americanos. Universidad Nacional de Rio Cuarto,
(1997): 52-61,
* With this assertion Rodriguez shows an almost explicit adherence to the
somehow en'oneous belief by which the only language worth learning is English and
the only public identity worth having is an American one.
50 
Anclajes VII, 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52,
Schooling and Self-image in Chicano Autobioaraphy
Obras citadas
Alire Saenz, Benjamin "In the Borderlands of Chicano Identity, There Are
Only Fragments" Michaelsen, S, & Johnson, D, E, (eds,) Border
Theory. The Limits of Cultural Politics. Minneapolis and London:
University of Minnesota Press, 1997,
Anzaldua, Gloria, BorderiandsLa frontera. The New Mestiza. San
Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 1987,
Bajtin, M, M, Teoria y estetica de la novela. 1989, Madrid: Taurus
Humanidades, 1991,
Galarza, Ernesto, Banio Boy. The Story of a Boy's Acculturation. Notre
Dame and London: University of Notre Dame Press, 1971,
Giroux, Henry, Pedagogia critica, resistencia cultural y la produccion del
deseo. Buenos Aires: REI Argentina S, A,, 1994,
Giroux, Henry, Caizando limites. Trabajadores cutturales y politicas
educativas. Barcelona: Paidos, 1997,
Jimenez, Francisco, "Chicano Literature: Sources and Themes", La
Revista Bilingue 1,1 (1977): 4-15
Macias, Ysidro Ramon, "The Evolution of the Mind" 1969, Hernandez-
Gutierrez, M, & Foster, D, (eds,), Uteratura Chicana, 1965-1995. An
Anthology in Spanish, English and Calo. New York and London:
Garland Publishing, Inc, 1997,
McLaren, Peter, Contranan-ativa, amnesia colonial e identidad de
mestizaje. Hacia una pedagogia de la formacion de la identidad
posmodema. Parana: Universidad Nacional de Entre Rios, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Educacion, 1994,
Rodriguez, Richard, Hunger of Memory. The Education of Richard
Rodriguez. An Autobiography. New York: Bantam Books, 1984.
Saldivar, Jose David, The Dialectics of Our America. Genealogy, Cultural
Critique, and Literary History. Durham and London: Duke University
Press, 1991,
Saldivar, Ramon, Chicano Nan-ative: The Dialectics of Difference.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991,
Saldivar-Hull, Sonia, Feminism on the Border Chicana Gender Politics
and Literature. 
Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: 
University of
California Press, 2000,
-4nc/ayes VII, 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52, 
' 
51
Enrique Alejandro Basabe
Staten, Henry. "Ethnic Authenticity, Class and Autobiography: The Case
oi Hunger of Memory" PIWLA 113,1 (1998): 103-116.
Stone, Albert E. (ed.). The American Autobiography. A Collection of
Critical Essays. NewYork: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1981.
Vazquez, Francisco H. "Chicanology: A Postmodern Analysis of
Meshicano Discourse" 1992. Hernandez-Gutierrez, M. & Foster, D.
(eds.). Literatura Chicana, 1965-10.95. An Anthology in Spanish,
English and Caib. New York and London: Garland Publishing, Inc.,
1997.
52 
Anclajes VII. 7 (diciembre 2003): 37-52.
